                                                                                            Piter Garcia <pzg8794@g.rit.edu>



     Student Teaching Welcome and details
     1 message

     Borys, Zen <zborys@warner.rochester.edu>                                                      Wed, Jan 21, 2026 at 3:00 PM
     To: "Garcia, Piter" <pgarcia8@u.rochester.edu>, "Piter Garcia (RIT Student)" <pzg8794@rit.edu>, Derek Romig
     <derek.romig@greececsd.org>
     Cc: Sue Maddamma <suemaddamma@gmail.com>, "Borys, Zen" <zborys@warner.rochester.edu>


          Hi All (Piter, Derek, Sue, and me):

          Apologies in advance – I know this is long. It’s meant to serve as more of a reference. Please reach out with
          questions and concerns. The most important detail is to set up a time to meet so we can discuss the
          placement.

          Derek, I hope that you’ve had a great start to the new year and semester! I’d like to begin this message by
          thanking you most sincerely, for agreeing to host Piter Garcia in your classroom this Spring. As one of Piter’s
          University Supervisors, I’ll work with you and Piter, to make the experience a positive one for Piter, your
          students, and you. I’m reaching out by e-mail during the early part of the eld experience to schedule a “meet
          and greet” type meeting so that we (Piter, Derek, Sue, and myself) can get to know each other and discuss
          the expectations and needs for the placement. Piter, I’m going to ask you to work with Mr. Romig and suggest
          times that t your schedule and then I can send a zoom link once we choose one that works for all. This
          placement involves two supervisors as Piter is earning a certi cation in computer science and inclusion,
          myself focused on computer science and Sue Maddamma focused on inclusion). We will work together as
          much as possible but there will be unique criteria speci c to each program. I also want to share some general
          information about placement expectations; to nd out if you’ve any questions for me; and to make sure we
          start getting on the same page regarding needs for the internship and your classroom.

          GENERAL INFORMATION AND EXPECTATIONS

          I’ve attached a graphic model of our internship process, which shows that the rst internship consists of 150+
          hours of observation and assistantship, with a gradual release of responsibility toward a ve-week (25 days)
          student teaching assignment later in the semester (admittedly imperfect - it shows a fall start date and 100
          hours, but it provides a general sense of the trajectory of the program and we are shifting to start in the
          Spring). During the semester, our students take up to 9 credits of coursework alongside their placements,
          which is why it’s important that we move gradually and systematically regarding classroom responsibilities.
          Our programs aren’t like others that have candidates take most or all their coursework before student
          teaching. Rather, we place students in schools alongside their coursework, to optimize opportunities for them
          to apply what they’re learning in one context to the other. That said, teaching candidates don’t necessarily
          spend all day, every day, in their eld placements. Instead, they work with their SBTE’s to arrange days and
          times that allow them consistency with particular classes and subject areas and provide some exibility to
          make sense of what they’re learning during their eld placements and complete other required coursework.

          The rst task that we’ll ask Piter to initiate with you is the creation of a formal letter of expectations, which
          dictates your schedule for the semester and anticipates speci c roles of the SBTE, teaching candidate, and
          supervisors. The target date for submitting the letter of expectations is two weeks after the placement begins.
          Candidates are not permitted to go past the observation and assistantship phase on to their ve-week
          student teaching phase, until they submit this letter and pass their eld experience evaluation. I will also
                                        fi
     fi




                              fi
                         fi
               fi




          schedule an observation/meeting with you and Piter towards the end of the internship to ensure that all
                                             fi




                                                  fi




          parties are on the same page moving into student teaching, to revise any points on the letter of expectations
          fi




                                                            fl
                    fi
fi




                              fi




                                                       fi
                                   fi
          if needed, and to discuss speci c needs and interests that the candidate-SBTE-supervisor relationship might
          ful ll.

          Our student teaching handbook lays out criteria for this letter of expectations, as well as speci c roles for
          candidates, supervisors, and SBTEs. I’d encourage you to give it a read-through, to aid in communicating
          and clarifying expectations for the semester: https://www.warner.rochester.edu/sites/default/files/2025-
          09/StudentTeachingHandbook%20-%202025-26.pdf

          The eld supervisor (me) is charged with two to three visits during the semester: one during the eld
          experience phase, and one to two during the ve-week student teaching phase. It is similar for Sue, but we
          will work together and coordinate the details as they make sense for our unique roles. If questions or
          concerns emerge at any point outside these visits, please contact me for support, either by e-mail or
          telephone. I’m here to serve as a resource for you, as well. If you have any questions about the tools or
          materials that Piter brings to your classroom, or if there are other teaching resources to which I can connect
          you, please don't hesitate to ask.

          CANDIDATE ASSESSMENT EXPECTATIONS

          Alongside our placement model, I’ve attached a few documents that we use to evaluate candidates in their
          placements. One (“Warner_MidpointEval.pdf”) is an assessment to be completed by you, Piter (as a self-
          evaluation), and UBTEs after the 150-hour observation and assistantship phase is complete. I would
          recommend that you and Piter sit down together with your completed documents, put them side by side, and
          use them to discuss your perceptions of progress to that point, as they can be effective tools for making sure
          you’re seeing eye to eye, or for negotiating expectations moving forward. Please submit your copy of this
          form to me, by e-mail after you’ve had that conversation. The ve weeks of student teaching cannot begin
          until this form is submitted.

          The second assessment document (“Warner_CPAST_Rubric.docx”) is Piter’s nal student teaching
          assessment. In order to reliably assess Piter’s performance, it’s important for all evaluators to participate in a
          brief online training program on understanding and using the CPAST. It shouldn’t take longer than 60 to 90
          minutes. At the end of the training, you’ll answer 10 questions to verify your understanding of the assessment
          rubric. If you miss two questions, three additional questions are given, to make sure that respondents receive
          an 85% or higher (which is the target inter-rater reliability score). If you do not receive an 85% or above, you
          will be asked to take the training again; but know that repeated trainings contain the same content and
          assessment questions as the rst effort. At the end of the training, you’ll need to enter your name and
          af liated university (ours may be listed either as “University of Rochester” or “Rochester University”), so that
          we have record of your completion. The training is accessible here: https://osu.az1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_
          cC8iDwgJ6JKLl7D

          At the end of the placement and once you and I take the CPAST training, all of us – you, Piter, and myself –
          will participate in a three-way conference where we individually rate Piter’s performance, discuss ratings,
          work to reach consensus scores for each assessment category, and articulate goals for Piter;s growth as a
          teacher. I’ve included another document (“Warner_CPAST_ExamplesOfEvidence.docx”) that explains what
          kinds of evidence might be associated with what kinds of rubric scores, as an optional resource for you all to
          consider (it is used during the online training for CPAST). Piter, you will need to self-assess using the CPAST
          at the end of the placement, but you do not need to take the training, as only the supervisor’s and
          cooperating teacher’s scores count toward your student teaching evaluation. I will facilitate the three-way
          conference via Zoom toward the end of the placement. After the three-way conference, I will submit the
          consensus score form, and Derek will submit her CPAST rubrics (with any notes to consider) to me.
           fi
fi




                                         fi
     fi




                                              fi
                fi




          Derek, to submit the midpoint assessment form, just download it, ll it out, and save the lename in this
          format: “Garcia_Romig_Spring2026MIDPOINT.pdf”. Then, send the completed forms to me
                     fi




                               fi




          at: zborys@warner.rochester.edu.
          fi
fi




                          fi




                                    fi
          MORE SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

          During the initial 150+ hours of assistantship, you and Piter should feel free to build in whatever collegial
          experiences you see t, given that the student’s primary roles are to: (1) study learning, teaching, curriculum,
          and classroom/school context, as a novice “teacher-researcher;” and (2) support you in planning, teaching,
          assessing students, and building your classroom community, at a scale that makes sense for someone new
          to the classroom. These kinds of experiences could include tutoring individuals or small groups of students,
          assisting with assessments and evaluation, gathering and creating instructional resources, co-teaching
          lessons or lesson segments, and the like. Candidates are encouraged to immerse themselves in their
          classroom/school communities, and they often do so by participating in meetings, school-based professional
          development, special projects or extracurricular activities that their SBTEs may be involved in, et cetera.

          As for the ve-week student teaching phase, it is assumed that interns gradually will take on some
          instructional responsibilities up to that point, to avoid a hard, awkward transition from the assistantship phase
          to instruction. It also is assumed that interns will spend 25 instructional days in the school during this phase,
          though the number of required preps and course sections taught is exible, depending on your and Piter’s
          needs and interests. Co-teaching experiences are especially welcome, where you both design, implement,
          and assess instruction together; or you might opt for an approach where Piter assumes primary instructional
          responsibility for one of your classes. It’s up to you both, depending on your expectations, circumstances,
          and comfort levels.

          One caveat: in this semester’s methods course, Piter will be responsible for developing and teaching a series
          of lessons designed to incorporate research-based practices or content explored during their methods
          classes. After practicing elements of that lesson in the methods course and modifying it based on classmates’
          and instructor’s feedback, Piter is asked to implement it in your classroom as well. That said, your feedback
          and guidance are welcome to ensure that the content appropriately ts into your curriculum. I also hope that,
          when possible, you’ll provide Piter with written, formative feedback on teaching during the last ve weeks of
          his internship, so there is a record of your helpful advice to return to and re ect on later.

          Again, thanks very much for agreeing to work with Piter this semester. Mentoring a new teacher is an
          important and challenging responsibility, and I’m glad you’ve decided to take it on! I recognize that this email
          contains a lot of information, so please reach out to me by e-mail or phone (cell: 585.259.9598) at any time
          about any matters related to Piter’s internship.

          All the best,
          Zenon




          4 attachments
                   Internship Graphic Model.pdf
                   227K
                   fieldexperience_eval.docx
                   17K
                   Warner_CPAST_ExamplesOfEvidence.docx
                   130K
     fi




                   WarnerSchool_CPAST_Rubric.docx
fi




                   68K
              fl




              fi




                        fi
                   fl
1/22/26, 6:57 PM                                           University of Rochester Mail - Welcome Reception in Your Honor!



                                                                                                     Piter Garcia <pgarcia8@u.rochester.edu>



  Welcome Reception in Your Honor!
  1 message

  Jen Hendrickson <jennifer.hendrickson@greececsd.org>                                                                  Thu, Jan 22, 2026 at 9:32 AM

     Dear Student Teachers, Interns, and Residents,

     Welcome to the Greece Central School District!

     We are incredibly happy that you are a part of our District this semester and would like to invite you to a
     Welcome Reception in your honor (invitation attached)! This is an opportunity for student teachers, interns
     and residents to learn more about GCSD and network with teachers and administrators throughout the
     district. Light refreshments will be provided. If you are placed in Greece during the second half of the
     semester you are still welcome to attend (ONLY for FALL: for the entire school year, you will have a second
     opportunity to attend this event in February).

     If you are available to join us on Monday, February 9, 2026 from 3:45-4:45 PM at the Professional Learning
     Center at 1790 Latta Road please RSVP (https://tinyurl.com/GCSDRSVP) by February 5th.

     We look forward to meeting you and hope your experience as part of the GCSD community is incredible!

     Sincerely,
     Jen Hendrickson
     Executive Director of Human Resources
     Greece Central School District
     Phone: (585) 966-2344
     Fax: (585) 966-2309
     Address: 750 Maiden Lane | Rochester, NY 14615
     Mailing Address: P.O. Box 300 | N. Greece, NY 14515-0300

     NOTICE: This message is from the Greece Central School District. This message and any attachments may be confidential and/or
     privileged and are intended only for the individual(s) or group(s) identified as the addressee. If the message addressee is in error, or
     you are not authorized to read, copy, or distribute this message or attachments; please delete this message and attachments and
     notify the sender by return email at the address listed above.


               NOTICE: This message is from the Greece Central School District. This message and any attachments may be confidential
               and/or privileged and are intended only for the individual(s) or group(s) identified as the addressee. If the message
               addressee is in error, or you are not authorized to read, copy, or distribute this message or attachments; please delete this
               message and attachments and notify the sender by return email at the address listed above.



           Student TeacherIntern Welcome Celebration Invitation (5).pdf
           77K




https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?ik=abd54f2666&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-f:1855027784709421154&simpl=msg-f:1855027784709421154           1/1
