         2025-26
   Field Experience and
Student Teaching Handbook
                                                Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook




Dear Teaching Candidates and School-Based Teacher Educators (SBTEs):

         Welcome to the Warner School of Education and Human Development’s field and
  student teaching experiences! This is an exciting time for candidates as they embark on the
  clinical phase of their education, working to deeply understand the joys, challenges, and
  opportunities of teaching.
         While candidates are most in control of their individual journeys as beginning teachers,
  the process of learning to teach inevitably is embedded in social institutions with different
  kinds of people, resources, values, and norms. Several recent studies point to the importance of
  stable school contexts and collaborative networks of mentors and University-Based Teacher
  Educators (UBTEs) for strengthening new teachers’ practices. We know, for example, that
  when mentors model and explain powerful teaching and provide candidates with regular
  constructive feedback in safe learning environments, those candidates go on to be more
  effective first-year teachers. In other words, the success of our students’ clinical experiences
  depends on the dedication and collective efforts of various people committed to helping them
  become creative thinkers, capable practitioners, and future leaders in their field.
         This handbook was developed to serve as an initial resource supporting all involved in
  the clinical phase of teacher education, including candidates, University-Based Teacher
  Educators, and School-Based Teacher Educators. At the Warner Graduate School of Education
  and Human Development, our ultimate goal is to prepare educators who are committed to the
  highest standards of teaching, learning, and public service – teachers who, in time, can
  transform the lives of their students and the schools in which they teach. We thank you
  sincerely for committing your time and energy to the process of engaging in this important
  work together.

Sincerely,
Kevin Meuwissen
Chair, Teaching and Curriculum
                                                                   Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                                                 Handbook Purpose




Contents

 Handbook Purpose ...................................................................................................................................... 3
 The Warner School Mission And Vision .................................................................................................... 5
 Teaching And Curriculum Program Philosophy......................................................................................... 6
  1. Integration of content and pedagogy. .................................................................................................. 6
  2. Integration of theory and practice. ....................................................................................................... 6
  3. A commitment to social justice. .......................................................................................................... 6
  4. A commitment to inclusion of students with disabilities. ................................................................... 7
  5. A sociocultural-historical perspective on learning and human development. ..................................... 7
  6. Using multiple forms of continuous assessment to inform instruction. .............................................. 8
  7. A commitment to enhance student learning through technology. ....................................................... 8
 Warner School Principles And Targeted Proficiencies For Teacher Candidates ....................................... 8
  1. Content Principle ................................................................................................................................. 8
  2. Learning Principle ............................................................................................................................... 9
  3. Equity Principle ................................................................................................................................... 9
  4. Pedagogy Principle .............................................................................................................................. 9
  5. Learning Community Principle ......................................................................................................... 10
  6. Communication Principle .................................................................................................................. 10
  7. Planning Principle.............................................................................................................................. 11
  8. Assessment Principle ......................................................................................................................... 11
  9. Professional Practice Principle .......................................................................................................... 11
  10. Community Principle......................................................................................................................... 12
 Roles And Responsibilities Of The Candidate ......................................................................................... 13
 Roles And Responsibilities Of The School-Based Teacher Educator ...................................................... 15
 Roles And Responsibilities Of The University-Based Teacher Educator ................................................ 18
 Roles And Responsibilities Of Warner Faculty ........................................................................................ 20
 Roles And Responsibilities Of The Senior Internship Program Specialist............................................... 22
 Professional Conduct ................................................................................................................................ 23
 Frequently Asked Questions ..................................................................................................................... 26
 Letter of Expectations ............................................................................................................................... 28
    Letter of Expectations: Specific Requirements..................................................................................... 28
 Absence Report ......................................................................................................................................... 31
 Legal Aspects Of Student Teaching.......................................................................................................... 32
 Physical Restraint Of Students .................................................................................................................. 37
 2025-2026 Program Faculty and Supervisor (UBTE) Directory .............................................................. 38

                                                                                                                                            2
                                              Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                            Handbook Purpose




Handbook Purpose

This handbook provides flexible guidelines through which the School-Based Teacher
Educator, University-Based Teacher Educator, teaching candidate, and university professor
can combine their dispositions, knowledge, and skills to develop a clinical experience that is
rewarding to all. By clarifying expectations at the outset and evaluating the process of
learning to teach over time, our program ensures that:

Candidates systematically improve their teaching knowledge and practices from field
experience through student teaching by gradually increasing their responsibility and
independence in a supportive environment.

School-Based Teacher Educators benefit from the energy and ideas of the candidate,
allowing for innovative instructional approaches within the boundaries of the
curriculum and school procedures.

University-Based Teacher Educators and Warner School faculty strengthen their
knowledge and practice in teacher preparation by maintaining open and collaborative
relationships with the candidate and the School-Based Teacher Educator and by drawing
directly from candidates’ clinical experiences in their coursework.

This handbook outlines what we believe to be a unique approach to mentoring and
supervising candidates. Before the beginning of the field and/or student teaching experience,
candidates and School-Based Teacher Educators should familiarize themselves with the
handbook.

School-Based Teacher Educators should focus especially on:
   1. The overview of the program
   2. The roles and responsibilities of the School-Based Teacher Educator
   3. Information regarding the letter of expectations

Candidates should focus especially on:
  1. The overview of the program
  2. The roles and responsibilities of the candidate
  3. Information regarding the letter of expectations

The goal of the program is to develop reflective teachers through a flexible structure
involving:
   1. Clear expectations.
   2. Regular observations by and feedback from both the School-Based Teacher Educator
       and the University-Based Teacher Educator.

                                                                                                 3
                                               Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                             Handbook Purpose




     3. Regular meetings to review the progress of the candidate and the process as a whole.
While the candidates are completing their field experiences and student teaching, they are also
taking concurrent, complementary university courses. Some of these courses are taken by all
candidates across all programs (e.g., Race, Class, Gender, and Disability in American Education;
Literacy Learning as Social Practice); others are taken only by candidates in their unique subject
areas (e.g., methods courses and student teaching seminars). The purposes of these courses are to
develop candidates’ theoretical and practical knowledge of learners and learning, teaching, and
school and community contexts; to help candidates link their disciplinary knowledge to their
evolving pedagogical dispositions and practices; to provide candidates with opportunities to
reflect and build new ideas and strategies upon their clinical experiences; and to interact with
numerous teacher educators simultaneously as they learn to understand and take on new
professional responsibilities.




                                                                                                4
                                              Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                            Handbook Purpose




The Warner School Mission And Vision


At the Warner School of Education and Human Development, we believe that
education can transform lives and make the world more just and humane. This vision
informs our teaching, research, and service as a graduate-level professional school in
a research institution, as we strive to:

   • Prepare knowledgeable, reflective, skilled and caring educators who can make an
      impact in the lives of individuals and who are leaders and agents of change;
   • Generate and disseminate knowledge to lead to new understandings of development,
      learning and change, on which more effective educational policies and practices can
      be grounded;
   • Collaborate across disciplines, professions and constituencies – to promote change
      that can significantly improve and transform education and support positive human
      development.

Our work in each of these domains is informed by the underlying beliefs that: the
improvement of education is in pursuit of social justice; development and learning shape
and are shaped by the socio-historical contexts in which they occur; the complexity of
educational problems requires an interdisciplinary and collaborative approach; and best
practices are grounded in research and theory, just as theory and research are informed by
practice.




                                                                                             5
                                               Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                             Handbook Purpose




Teaching And Curriculum Program Philosophy


Our philosophy of education at the Warner School applies to teacher education
programming in the following ways:

Integration of content and pedagogy.

Effective teachers need to have a solid understanding of the subject matters they teach. They
need to confront fundamental questions of what they should teach, how it should be taught,
why it should be taught that way, and what fundamental social good it serves. In addition,
future teachers need to know what is appropriate for the age/grade level they teach and for
the children, families, and communities in which they teach. Therefore, “teaching methods”
are not developed universally, or in isolation, but are grounded in theory, research, and
practice that helps candidates understand particular relationships among students, teachers,
subject matters, and the contexts in which they interact and learn. At the core of each
teacher preparation program are two or more courses that attend to the nature of the subject
matter to be taught, aims and practices for teaching it, and the assumptions and implications
of choosing specific teaching methods in particular circumstances at various developmental
levels.

Integration of theory and practice.

At the Warner School, we believe that research and practice are deeply and inseparably
intertwined; and we believe that future teachers should be able to use knowledge gained
through a synthesis of research and practice to construct environments where quality
teaching and learning can take place. Warner candidates have a unique opportunity to
understand these intersections throughout their course of study, given the concurrence of
clinical experiences and coursework. While challenging for both students and faculty, this
approach encourages candidates to bring insight and questions from their classroom
experiences into their courses and vice versa, and to develop the habits of a reflective
practitioner. Further, given their roles in a research school of education, Warner School
faculty believe strongly in the notion of praxis: that educational change is built from mutual
interactions among research, teaching, and public service. Warner School faculty conduct
original research to build knowledge and improve practices in their fields, and in turn, we
press candidates to draw extensively and comprehensively from research results to make
professional decisions.




A commitment to social justice.

                                                                                                 6
                                                Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                              Handbook Purpose




Underlying all of our teacher preparation programs is a core commitment to ensuring that all
young people have access to powerful opportunities to learn, grow, and participate
meaningfully and equitably in civil society. This commitment is situated in socio-historical
contexts where particular groups are privileged and others are marginalized. Warner School
candidates understand that social justice is both an ideology and a goal; that is, it is both
theoretical and practical. Teacher candidates come to see learning as a social practice that
inevitably requires them to engage with power structures and relationships to construct
knowledge and meaning with their students. This requires more than good will and good
intentions; it requires a strong knowledge base and dispositions for making the world fairer,
more equitable, and more humane through the subject matter they teach. We strive to
encourage candidates to develop a sense of social responsibility by reflecting on themselves
and their interactions with others as raced, classed, gendered and abled individuals. Through
such reflection, our candidates develop important cross-cultural understandings and come to
recognize teachers’ roles in maintaining or transforming practices that engender inequality.

A commitment to inclusion of students with disabilities.

We believe that all teachers should be prepared to recognize the diverse needs of their
students, and they should have strategies to differentiate instruction to meet those needs. We
believe that all students bring rich and meaningful experiences to school, and that those
experiences should be drawn into the classroom as social resources for curriculum and
instruction. Warner School graduates lead efforts to advocate for the full inclusion of all
students, particularly students with disabilities, as part of their efforts to improve schooling.
We view inclusion as a commitment to the education of all students in heterogeneous
schools and communities, and to maintaining high expectations based on students’
individual strengths, needs, and interests. Inclusion promotes and requires collaboration
among school, family, and community while providing students and teachers with the
necessary supports and services. All of our programs include at least one course designed to
help candidates facilitate the learning, participation, and belonging of students with
disabilities. We also make conscious efforts to offer pre-service teachers the opportunity to
conduct their clinical experiences in fully inclusive settings.

A sociocultural-historical perspective on learning and human development.

We believe that young people learn through active engagement in culturally situated
activities with knowledgeable others. Communities of learners and teachers emerge as
social systems where knowledge is built, used, and negotiated through interpersonal
relationships; and thus, learning is socially constructed. It is not merely an act of
acquiring or receiving knowledge. We see children as agents who not only are
affected by cultural practices and institutions, but who also actively construct and
change the world. Course experiences and assignments model the construction of

                                                                                                    7
                                               Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                             Handbook Purpose




communities of learners, and in turn, candidates come to understand how to build
meaningful cultural contexts and communities for others to learn and develop.

Using multiple forms of continuous assessment to inform instruction.

Assessment is an integral part of meaningful teaching that supports learners’ development.
We believe that powerful assessment generates clear evidence of student learning over time,
is embedded in purposeful learning activities for real audiences, and is tailored to particular
contexts of learning, so as to support student inquiry, meaning-making, and expression.
Warner School candidates come to see assessment as a way to strengthen curriculum and
instruction and better meet student needs, as well as to provide students with various ways
to take measured risks and demonstrate growth. Student self-assessment and critical
reflection are integral to this model. Candidates will learn the importance of carefully
crafting multiple forms of continuous assessment with clear guidelines and feedback
opportunities for students, that also serve as decision-making tools for teachers. These forms
will include formal and informal, summative, formative, and cumulative modes of
assessment. Candidates also will interrogate the climate and consequences of high-stakes
testing and the limitations of using single-point assessment instruments to make decisions
about students’ capabilities.

A commitment to enhance student learning through technology.

Technological tools are integral parts of interpersonal activity and learning in classrooms,
communities, and society. In our courses, candidates interrogate how technology affects
people’s development and use of subject-matter knowledge and can both transform and
reproduce pedagogical practices and unequal distributions of resources. Thus, we view
technology use as a social practice that has the potential to change relationships among
learners, teachers, subject matter, and social, political, and economic resources, for better
and worse. Warner School candidates will focus on using technology for communication,
collaboration and community building, research, problem solving, social critique, and truth
seeking. To do this, they will learn how specific technologies may or may not be
appropriate as learning and teaching tools, and will integrate technology into their teaching
in ways that are constructive for an inclusive of all students. Candidates must be prepared
to promote ethical, equitable, legal, literate, and humane uses of technology among
students as means of empowering learners to be active citizens in a global society.




                                                                                                  8
                                                Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                            Warner School Principles and Targeted
                                                                                      Proficiencies




Warner School Principles And Targeted Proficiencies For Teacher
Candidates


NOTE:
• Each principle is derived from the Interstate New Teacher Assessment and Support
  Consortium (INTASC) Standards and augmented with priorities that are specific to the
  Warner School of Education. These principles address key areas/components of teaching,
  indicating what we think is most important for our teacher candidates to learn and achieve.
• Each principle has been articulated in such a way that it can be measured, and includes a
  combination of candidates’ dispositions, knowledge, and skills.
• We are careful to recognize that these principles articulate what we might hope to see in the
  practices of experienced practitioners; and yet, we are dealing here with candidates who are
  just entering the teaching profession. Therefore, we expect candidates to develop an entry-
  level set of dispositions, understandings, and skills; to learn a sub-set of pedagogical practices
  that they eventually will come to know and demonstrate across their teaching careers; to lay
  the groundwork for life-long learning; and to show that they have the capacity to create
  lessons and learning environments that reflect wise and powerful practice, even if they may
  not yet be able to do so consistently.

 1. Content Principle
 The teacher candidate understands the central concepts, tools of inquiry, and structures of the
 discipline(s) he or she teaches, as identified by relevant professional organizations, and can
 create learning experiences that make these aspects of subject matter meaningful for all
 students.

 Related candidates’ proficiencies:
    1.1. Candidates have a broad preparation in the subject area(s) taught, consistent with
         professional and New York State standards.
    1.2. Candidates have a good understanding of some of the central concepts, tools of
         inquiry and structures of the subject matter(s) taught, and have developed
         strategies and skills to continue their learning in this area.
    1.3. Candidates are familiar with the principles and concepts delineated in professional,
         New York State, and Warner Teaching and Curriculum standards, and their
         implications for curricular and instructional decisions.
    1.4. Candidates are able to create learning experiences that make the subject
         matter meaningful and relevant for all students.



                                                                                                  8
                                              Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                          Warner School Principles and Targeted
                                                                                    Proficiencies




2. Learning Principle
The teacher candidate understands how all children learn and develop, and can provide
learning opportunities that support their intellectual, social and personal development.
The teacher candidate understands that learning involves active engagement in
culturally valued activities with knowledgeable others and the construction of new
knowledge.

Related candidates’ proficiencies:
   2.1. Candidates understand human development and how it is affected by context.
   2.2. Candidates understand that all students construct knowledge through active
        engagement in culturally valued activities, and know what is appropriate for their
        students to learn, based on their age/grade level and the strengths, experiences and
        resources of their family/community background.
   2.3. Candidates are able to provide learning experiences that take into consideration the
        students’ developmental level and draw on the strengths and resources available in
        students’ prior experiences, as well as the school, family, and community contexts
        in which they live.

3. Equity Principle
The teacher candidate understands how students differ in their approaches to learning and
creates instructional opportunities that are adapted to diverse learners. The teacher
understands the role each of us plays in the maintenance and transformation of social and
educational practices that engender inequity and is committed to promote equity and social
justice.

Related candidates’ proficiencies:
   3.1. Candidates understand equity and social justice principles, including everyone’s
        right to have an opportunity to learn and what constitutes equitable and socially
        just behavior and treatment for themselves and others.
   3.2. Candidates are committed to high moral and ethical standards and respect and
        value their students’ differences in contexts and approaches to learning.
   3.3. Candidates are familiar with some of the cultural, linguistic and learning
        differences and disabilities their students may present and their implications for
        the classroom.
   3.4. Candidates are able to provide learning experiences that are culturally relevant and
        address the strengths and needs of all students.

4. Pedagogy Principle
The teacher candidate understands the link between content and pedagogy. As such, the
teacher candidate understands and uses a variety of instructional strategies to encourage all
students' development of critical thinking, problem solving, and performance skills that are
appropriate for specific topics and subject areas, as identified by the relevant professional
                                                                                                9
                                              Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                          Warner School Principles and Targeted
                                                                                    Proficiencies




organization(s). The teacher candidate is able to use and problematize the various
technologies available to facilitate learning.

Related candidates’ proficiencies:
   4.1. Candidates are familiar with a wide array of instructional strategies consistent with
        professional, New York State and Warner School program standards, and understand
        their potential uses, values and limitations for achieving specific learning goals.
   4.2. Candidates are able to use a variety of teaching and learning strategies and classroom
        structures to achieve the learning goals articulated in relevant professional, New York
        State and Warner School program standards.
   4.3. Candidates understand the potential values as well as problems and limitations of
        using technology in instruction.
   4.4. Candidates are able to use technology in a variety of ways to support student
        learning within specific content areas.

5. Learning Community Principle
The teacher candidate uses an understanding of individual and group motivation and
behavior to create a learning environment that encourages positive social interaction,
active engagement in learning, and self-motivation for all students.

Related candidates’ proficiencies:
   5.1. Candidates understand what may encourage or hinder student’s motivation
        and engagement in learning, based on an analysis of research and practice.
   5.2. Candidates are able to construct comfortable and safe classroom environments for
        all students.
   5.3. Candidates are able to construct a classroom environment that supports
        student motivation and learning and the creation of a “community of
        learners.”

6. Communication Principle
The teacher candidate understands the key role played by language in teaching and
learning. The teacher candidate uses knowledge of effective verbal, nonverbal, and
media communication techniques to foster active inquiry, collaboration, and supportive
interaction in the classroom.

Related candidates’ proficiencies:
   6.1. Candidates understand the role of language in teaching and learning.
   6.2. Candidates are familiar with and proficient in a wide variety of modes and
        vehicles for communication that can support learning and inquiry for all
        students.


                                                                                              10
                                               Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                           Warner School Principles and Targeted
                                                                                     Proficiencies




   6.3. Candidates are able to use effectively a variety of modes of communication to
        make ideas accessible to all students and foster inquiry.
   6.4. Candidates are able to construct curriculum activities that incorporate oral, written,
        visual, and electronic texts as tools for interaction and communication across
        multiple contexts, and that facilitate all students’ critical analysis of such texts.

7. Planning Principle
The teacher candidate plans instruction based upon knowledge of subject matter, students,
the community, and curriculum goals.

Related candidates’ proficiencies:
   7.1. Candidates are able to align instruction with learning goals consistent with
        professional and New York State standards.
   7.2. Candidates are able to implement lessons according to a well-defined and high-quality
        plan.

8. Assessment Principle
The teacher candidate understands and uses formal and informal assessment
strategies to evaluate and ensure the continual intellectual, social, and physical
development of all learners and to inform instruction. Assessment is embedded in
authentic learning activities that are for real audiences and real purposes.

Related candidates’ proficiencies:
   8.1. Candidates understand the multiple purposes of assessment and are familiar
        with a variety of assessment and evaluation strategies, their purposes and
        potential uses.
   8.2. Candidates are able to use a variety of assessment and evaluation strategies,
        including some that are embedded in authentic learning activities and have real
        audiences and purposes, to monitor, assess, and provide guidance to student
        learning over time.
   8.3. Candidates are able to use assessment to inform instruction by making links
        between their teaching and student performance and by adjusting their practice as a
        result of analysis of and reflection on student assessment data.
   8.4. Candidates are able to have a positive effect on their students’ learning.

9. Professional Practice Principle
The teacher candidate is a reflective practitioner who continually evaluates the effects of
his/her choices and actions on others (students, parents, and other professionals in the
learning community) and who actively seeks out opportunities to grow professionally,
including staying up to date with research, theories, and best practices in his/her field.

Related candidates’ proficiencies:
                                                                                                 11
                                               Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                           Warner School Principles and Targeted
                                                                                     Proficiencies




   9.1. Candidates are committed to continue to learn and improve their practice
        throughout their teaching career.
   9.2. Candidates are able to reflect on their practices, constructively use critiques of
        their practice, and draw from theories and research results, in order to make
        necessary adjustments to enhance student learning.
   9.3. Candidates recognize the key role played by professional organizations and the
        importance of participating in these learning communities; this includes
        knowing and using relevant standards generated by these organizations
        (including professional ethics standards).

10. Community Principle
The teacher candidate fosters relationships with school colleagues,
parents/caregivers, and agencies in the larger community to support students'
learning and well-being.

Related candidates’ proficiencies:
   10.1. Candidates value and seek out parental and community involvement.
   10.2. Candidates are able to communicate effectively with parents/caregivers and
         colleagues.




                                                                                               12
                                                           Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                       Warner School Principles and Targeted
                                                                                                 Proficiencies




Roles And Responsibilities Of The Candidate

Please read the entire student teacher handbook to be clear about the roles and
responsibilities of various participants in candidates’ clinical experiences. There are two
primary elements directly associated with candidates’ clinical experiences: (1) participation in
teaching activities in the field classroom and school; and (2) participation in weekly seminars on
teaching with University-Based Teacher Educators and other subject-area candidates. Only the
classroom and school field activities are discussed here.

At the beginning of the clinical experience, the candidate should:

 1. Discuss with their School-Based Teacher Educator(s):
    a. The school institution, its resources, its layout and divisions of labor, its philosophy
       and norms, and the backgrounds of institutional leaders and colleagues.
    b. The nature of the community in which the school is located and the ways in which
       community members, including parents, are involved in school affairs.
    c. Predominant programming priorities and curricular materials.
    d. Modes of interacting with classrooms and individual students.
    e. Classroom schedules, routines, and procedures.
    f. How professional decisions commonly are made in the placement classroom.
    g. How the candidate will be introduced to and expected to interact with the
       class.

 2. Write the letter of expectations in conjunction with the School-Based Teacher
    Educator(s) and the University-Based Teacher Educator and submit to Warner program
    faculty and the Director of Student Teaching within the first week of the placement.

 3. Give the University-Based Teacher Educator a detailed schedule for the clinical
    experience before the end of the second week of the placement. Create a system for
    contacting the University-Based Teacher Educator, faculty, and/or School-Based
    Teacher Educator in the event of an emergency or a school closing on a day when an
    observation is scheduled (e.g., a snow day).

 Required experiences for student teaching1:

 1. Classroom responsibility: Gradually assume the responsibilities for the classroom
    activities, but leave sufficient time for thorough preparation and reflection. Initially,
    the candidate should spend time observing, researching, and assisting in class. The

 1
     Experiences required for the field experience will be identified in the concurrent seminar.

                                                                                                           13
                                              Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                          Warner School Principles and Targeted
                                                                                    Proficiencies




   requirement to take over classroom instruction varies by certification area. Elementary
   candidates are expected to take over classroom responsibilities in their 10-week spring
   placements only. Secondary candidates are expected to take over responsibility in both
   student teaching placements, but the number of times varies by content area.

2. Lesson plans: The School-Based Teacher Educator and/or the University-Based
   Teacher Educator will require written lesson plans according to the Warner School
   format, particularly during formal observations. Make sure to plan lessons in
   accordance with the Warner School lesson plan requirements. If a particular lesson
   planning format is used in the placement school, candidates are expected to follow the
   use of that format during non-observed lessons, in accordance with school policy.

3. Innovative unit: Each candidate is required to plan and implement at least one
   innovative unit of study. Elementary candidates are required to complete units in each
   of their content area courses. Secondary candidates will complete a unit alongside their
   spring courses.

4. Authentic participation in school activity: While planning, classroom community
   building, instruction, assessment, and reflective practice are the core proficiencies
   targeted during student teaching, each candidate is expected to participate in other
   kinds of work that support their professional growth. These include observing other
   effective teachers in the same and different subject areas; participating in parent-
   teacher conferences, conferences with specialists, and open houses; and participating in
   school-based professional development experiences and faculty meetings whenever
   possible.




                                                                                              14
                                                Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                     Roles and Responsibilities of the School-Based
                                                                                  Teacher Educator




Roles And Responsibilities Of The School-Based Teacher Educator

School-Based Teacher Educators serve the Warner School and its teaching candidates as a vital
member of a community of teacher educators. In collaboration with Warner faculty and
University-Based Teacher Educators, School-Based Teacher Educators play a critical role in
achieving the first part of the Warner vision, which is to:
        Prepare knowledgeable, reflective, skilled, and caring educators who
        can make an impact in the lives of individuals and who are leaders and
        agents of change.

 To this end, the following activities have been outlined:

Generally:

    1. Help make the student teaching experience enjoyable and productive for all involved.

    2. Collaborate regularly with the candidate, University-Based Teacher Educator, and
        university faculty to support the candidate’s growth as a teacher.

    3. Discuss ideas, make suggestions, and provide practical information to aid the
        candidate.

    4. Make arrangements for the candidate to visit other classes and to participate in
       various school meetings.

    5. Evaluate lesson plans before the candidate delivers lessons and provide constructive
        feedback.

    6. Understand that the candidate is taking methods courses in conjunction with their
        field experience and student teaching and support their learning holistically.

    7. Provide time for the candidate to implement field-based assignments required in
        concurrent methods courses.

    8. Read the Student Teaching Handbook and sign the letter of expectations accordingly.

More specifically:

At the beginning of the placement:

                                                                                                15
                                                                Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                     Roles and Responsibilities of the School-Based
                                                                                                  Teacher Educator




       1. Develop a letter of expectations with the candidate within the first week of the
           placement. This required letter outlines the expectations of all participants in the
           clinical experience. (See the section of this handbook titled “Letter of Expectations”
           for format.)

       2. Give the candidate a clear understanding of your classroom procedures and
           curriculum as well as relevant school and district policies, procedures, and norms.

       3. Plan instruction with the candidate and appropriately integrate the candidate into
           classroom and school activities.

       4. Regularly discuss what curricular and instructional decisions you make so the
           candidate clearly understands rationales for these choices.

       5. Discuss the logistical elements of your position (e.g., absences, fire drills, substitutes).

During the placement2:

       1. Specify in the letter of expectations when the candidate will take up full
           responsibility for teaching, assessing, fulfilling administrative assignments, and
           maintaining contact with parents for up to five of your classes.

       2. Provide the candidate with a variety of classroom activities to observe, analyze, and
           discuss, and share your own ideas and experiences to help the candidate develop
           their thinking about and adaptability relative to teaching and learning.

       3. Support the development of and approve candidate’s lesson plans/units, including the
           Innovative Unit candidates are required to implement during student teaching.
           Candidates may need to supplement required textbooks or materials in order to
           fulfill the requirements of their concurrent methods courses.

       4. Provide the candidate with the opportunity to teach their own lessons and develop
           their own style. Observe how the candidate interacts with students and subject
           matter and provide constructive feedback; and allow the candidate to take on


2
    The requirement to take over classroom instruction varies by certification area. Elementary candidates are expected to take
    over classroom responsibilities in their 10-week spring placements only. Secondary candidates are expected to take over
    responsibility in both student teaching placements, but the number of times varies by content area.

                                                                                                                                  16
                                          Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                               Roles and Responsibilities of the School-Based
                                                                            Teacher Educator




   primary instructional responsibility when being observed by University-Based
   Teacher Educator/faculty member.

5. Plan to leave classroom activity in the candidate’s hands frequently enough so
    students respect and adapt to the candidate’s role as a teacher.

6. Regularly confer with the University-Based Teacher Educator and/or faculty
    member, including status updates on the candidate’s progress and participation in
    collaborative assessment conferences.

7. Complete and return all formal assessments to the Director of Student Teaching in a
    timely fashion, which triggers your payment from the Warner School.

8. Monitor candidate absences, tardiness, and/or other concerns, if they develop, and do
    not hesitate to discuss them with the University-Based Teacher Educator and
    program faculty.




                                                                                           17
                                                Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                   Roles and Responsibilities of the University-Based
                                                                                   Teacher Educator




Roles And Responsibilities Of The University-Based Teacher Educator

University-Based Teacher Educators serve the Warner School and its teaching candidates as a
vital member of a community of teacher educators. In collaboration with Warner faculty and
School-Based Teacher Educators, University-Based Teacher Educators play a critical role in
achieving the first part of the Warner vision, which is to:
        Prepare knowledgeable, reflective, skilled, and caring educators who
        can make an impact in the lives of individuals and who are leaders and
        agents of change.

 To this end, the following activities have been outlined:

Generally:

    1. Help make the student teaching experience enjoyable and productive for all involved.

    2. Collaborate regularly with the candidate, School-Based Teacher Educator, and
        university faculty to support the candidate’s growth as a teacher.

    3. Discuss ideas, make suggestions, and provide practical information to aid the
        candidate.

    4. Evaluate lesson plans before the candidate delivers lessons, when possible, and
        provide constructive feedback.

    5. Understand that the candidate is taking methods courses in conjunction with their
        field experience and student teaching and support their learning holistically.

    6. Read the Student Teaching Handbook and sign the letter of expectations accordingly.

More specifically:

    1. Negotiate the required letter of expectations with the candidate and the School-Based
       Teacher Educator(s) at the beginning of each placement.

    2. Formally observe each candidate in accordance with program-level requirements,
       which usually consist of one observation during the field experience, two
       observations during the first student teaching placement, and three observations
       during the second student teaching placement.


                                                                                                 18
                                           Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                              Roles and Responsibilities of the University-Based
                                                                              Teacher Educator




3. Arrange appointments for each observation. Before the classroom observation,
   discuss objectives and outcomes with the candidate, and meet with the candidate
   after the lesson to debrief it.

4. Write a formal evaluation narrative after each observation that includes strengths,
   weaknesses, and recommendations for improvement. Include specific observed
   phenomena and critiques to help the candidate become a reflective teacher and
   improve their practice. Give copies of observation narratives and evaluations to the
   candidate, the School-Based Teacher Educator, the Senior Internship Program
   Specialist, and to program faculty, as requested.

5. Facilitate candidate placement and troubleshoot problems that may arise. Meet with
   Warner program faculty to discuss candidate progress, and alert the Senior Internship
   Program Specialist and Warner program faculty of any problems that may need
   intervention.

6. Be knowledgeable and supportive of teacher certification assessments.

7. Attend and participate in weekly clinical experience seminars at the university.

8. If requested by the candidate, write a letter of recommendation at the end of the
    clinical experience.




                                                                                            19
                                               Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                       Roles and Responsibilities of Warner faculty




Roles And Responsibilities Of Warner Faculty

At the Warner School, the program faculty who teach concurrent methods courses and clinical
experiences serve as vital members of a community of teacher educators. In collaboration with
University-Based Teacher Educators and School-Based Teacher Educators, program faculty play
a critical role in achieving the first part of the Warner vision, which is to:
          Prepare knowledgeable, reflective, skilled, and caring educators who
          can make an impact in the lives of individuals and who are leaders and
          agents of change.

 To this end, the following activities have been outlined:

Generally:

    1. Help make the student teaching experience enjoyable and productive for all involved.

    2. Collaborate regularly with the candidate, School-Based Teacher Educator, and
        University-Based Teacher Educator to support the candidate’s growth as a teacher.

    3. Discuss ideas, make suggestions, and provide practical information to aid the
        candidate.

    4. Evaluate lesson plans before the candidate delivers lessons, when possible, and
        provide constructive feedback.

    5. Read the Student Teaching Handbook and sign the letter of expectations accordingly.

More specifically:

    1. Facilitate candidate placement in coordination with University-Based Teacher
        Educators and the Senior Internship Program Specialist, support communication and
        collaboration among University-Based Teacher Educators and School-Based
        Teacher Educators, and be available to mediate problems that may arise with the
        placement.

    2. Observe each candidate at least once during the field experience and student teaching.

    3. Draw explicitly from candidates’ clinical experiences when teaching concurrent
        methods courses and seminars, and collaborate with University-Based Teacher
        Educators to plan and teach seminars.

                                                                                                20
                                           Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                   Roles and Responsibilities of Warner faculty




4. Evaluate candidates’ progress and performance in their coursework and clinical
    experiences, and make final determinations about candidate advancement at
    appropriate evaluation points.

5. If requested by the candidate, write a letter of recommendation at the end of the
    candidate’s program.




                                                                                            21
                                               Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                               Roles and Responsibilities of the Director of Student
                                                                                           Teaching




Roles And Responsibilities Of The Senior Internship Program Specialist

The Director of Student Teaching serves the Warner School and its teaching candidates as a vital
member of a community of teacher educators. In collaboration with Warner faculty, School-
Based Teacher Educators, and University-Based Teacher Educators, the Senior Internship
Program Specialist plays a critical role in achieving the first part of the Warner vision, which is
to:
        Prepare knowledgeable, reflective, skilled, and caring educators who
        can make an impact in the lives of individuals and who are leaders and
        agents of change.

 The Senior Internship Program Specialist is responsible for leading the placement of all
 teaching candidates in collaboration with faculty, University-Based Teacher Educators,
 School-Based Teacher Educators, and school district personnel. To this end, the following
 activities have been outlined:

 1. Collaborate with Warner faculty and University-Based Teacher Educators to identify
    appropriate School-Based Teacher Educators.

 2. Collect and maintain accurate candidate records, including contact information, program
    requirements and placement needs, and evaluation documentation.

 3. Collect and maintain accurate School-Based Teacher Educator records, including contact
    information, employment status and teaching assignments, and assessments of past
    experiences with our programs.

 4. Set up, implement, and monitor clinical experience schedules.

 5. Handle all procedures required by local school districts associated with establishing and
    finalizing clinical placements.

 6. Maintain regular communication among teacher educators at the Warner School, local
    district administrators, candidates, and School-Based Teacher Educators about clinical
    experience policies and procedures, including the establishment of placements.

 7. Organize and host the summer clinical experience orientation.




                                                                                                22
                                                Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                            Professional Conduct




Professional Conduct

As a teaching candidate in a professional graduate program, you represent and create impressions
of yourself, the Warner School, and the University of Rochester. Candidates are expected to
conduct themselves professionally and exercise good judgment in their clinical experiences. This
section of the handbook outlines some of these expectations for professional conduct.

Establishing the field placement
A considerable amount of time and effort go into establishing and confirming clinical
placements. Placements often are negotiated at district levels and involve several levels of
administration. At no time should a candidate leave a confirmed placement without consultation
with the program faculty, University-Based Teacher Educator, and Director of Student Teaching.
If you encounter any difficulties during a placement, contact your field University-Based
Teacher Educator, program faculty, and the Director of Student Teaching immediately, and they
will address the issue as quickly as possible. While removal from a confirmed placement is rare,
occasionally it is necessary in the best interests of the candidate or School-Based Teacher
Educator. Such a decision will be made only through collaboration among Warner School faculty
and staff.

Introductions
Prior to the beginning of the placement, candidates should establish communications with their
School-Based Teacher Educators and begin setting expectations for working together. On or
before the first day at school, candidates should go to the school’s main office and introduce
themselves to the appropriate administrative staff. You may be asked to provide the office with
your name, address, date of birth, vehicle information, and university identification. Additional
procedures may be necessary to grant you access to the building and/or provide you with school
identification materials. Be patient during introductions, especially in the fall; the beginning of
the school year is a busy time in which teachers, administrators, and their support staff are
juggling multiple responsibilities.

Identification and attendance
Candidates should display their university identification at all times during their clinical
experiences, and also may be required to display identification issued by the school district.
Candidates are permitted three absences per placement. More than three absences require that the
candidate make up missed days. Whenever an absence is necessary, the candidate is expected to
notify the School-Based Teacher Educator as soon as possible. Candidates will follow the
school schedule, not the Warner School schedule, for closures and breaks. An absence form must
be submitted to Warner program faculty and the Senior Internship Program Specialist.

Appearance
How a candidate appears is a reflection of the candidate, the Warner School, and the University
of Rochester. First impressions and patterns of appearance both will influence how students and

                                                                                                 23
                                                 Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                             Professional Conduct




colleagues perceive and interact with you. Candidates should discuss school policies and norms
regarding appearance, including dress codes, with their School-Based Teacher Educators and/or
school administrators. As a general rule, observe the School-Based Teacher Educator and others
within the building and dress slightly above their degree of professional normativity. If casual
attire is common, be sure that the attire is neither inappropriately revealing nor offensive in style
or content. Typical attire for school settings includes dress shoes; professional pants, skirts,
and/or dresses; and dress shirts or blouses. Candidates also should observe high standards of
personal grooming and cleanliness.

Punctuality
Prior to beginning a field placement, candidates should familiarize themselves with the school
start time and the amount of time it takes to settle into each day’s work. It is a good idea to arrive
15 to 20 minutes ahead of the scheduled start time initially, until the candidate is familiar with
parking and navigating the school building. Keep in mind that your placements are professional
development and informal interview opportunities, and school administrators and School-Based
Teacher Educators expect you to be on time. If you must arrive late or leave early for any reason,
be sure to communicate as such to your School-Based Teacher Educator.

Confidentiality
During clinical placements, candidates will be come into contact with confidential information
about students that is protected by privacy laws. Unless there is a compelling reason to share
such information with appropriate professionals – i.e., for the educational benefit of, or out of
concern for, their students – candidates should not share or repeat any confidential information
about students in any format.

Contact information and communications
During the course of the field placement, candidates may wish to share their email address and/or
cell phone numbers with School-Based Teacher Educators, University-Based Teacher Educators,
program faculty, administrators, and/or other school support staff. When communicating with
others, candidates should strongly consider how both the source and content of their
communications might be received by their audience. Communications with university and
school professionals should never include potentially offensive or inappropriate content.
Candidates also are advised not to use popular social media platforms to communicate with
school personnel and should not provide personal contact information, such as cell phone
numbers or social media account information, to students. To assist with professional
communications, the Warner School provides a university email address to all teaching
candidates. This will be the address used by Warner School faculty and staff to contact you.
Candidates are advised not to use their electronic devices for personal business during their
placements, but may decide to use them for professional purposes.

Social networking



                                                                                                    24
                                                Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                            Professional Conduct




Administrators, School-Based Teacher Educators, and students often view what candidates post
to their social networking sites, in an effort to learn more about them. Candidates should take the
time to review their social networks with this in mind and remove anything that might be
considered inappropriate. Consider the extent to which your social media profiles represent you
in ways that are favorable to prospective employers and colleagues. Candidates should neither
friend or follow students on social networking sites nor invite students to friend or follow them;
and you are advised to be cautious when friending or following members of your placement
school faculty or staff, particularly during the clinical experience.

Photography
Candidates are not permitted to photograph or video-record images of students in their
placements for personal use. Candidates are only permitted to record students for professional
certification or university course requirements, once permission has been granted from children’s
parents or guardians. Images of students, purposefully or inadvertently captured, should never be
posted to social media or other public forums.

Personal items
Candidates are discouraged from bringing personal items of value to their placement classrooms.
If you need to bring such items, ask your School-Based Teacher Educator where they may be
secured safely.




                                                                                                 25
                                               Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                     Frequently Asked Questions




Frequently Asked Questions

1. The program demands seem intense. How will I do it all?

   Use summer sessions to take as many classes as you can, and practice effective time
   management and self-care strategies while student teaching full-time. The program is
   built to ensure that your course load is lighter during full-time student teaching. Use your
   network of faculty, University-Based Teacher Educators, School-Based Teacher
   Educators, support staff, and classmates as a support structure, to help you navigate the
   experience. Your School-Based Teacher Educator was once in your shoes, and they may
   be able to provide some guidance on managing the demands on your time. The weekly
   seminar is a great space to reflect on your experiences and learn how others are coping
   with similar challenges.

2. How many times will I be observed?

   Each student teaching experience is unique in that everyone has different needs; and the
   number of observations required to successfully complete the program may vary by
   candidate. The faculty member responsible for supervising your program will provide
   you with additional information, but typically, the minimum number of University-
   Based Teacher Educator observations per semester is three, and program faculty likely
   will visit your classroom at least once over the course of the clinical experience.

3. Can I choose where to student teach based on interests, prior involvement with a school,
   or my own children’s enrollment in a school?

   No. While we do take a number of factors into consideration when establishing
   placements – e.g., proximity to your home, content specialization, even professional
   interests in particular school contexts and student populations – we find that candidates
   get the most out of the clinical experience when placed at a site where they have little or
   no previous involvement. Also, districts have protocols that must be followed, and many
   colleges in the region are simultaneously trying to place students. Individual requests
   from students are not considered by districts. We also do not place candidates in schools
   that they attended as K-12 students.

4. Can I be guaranteed a placement in a specific district or on a bus route?

   Unfortunately, we can make no guarantees in this regard, though we attempt to consider
   candidates’ transportation circumstances when setting up placements. Ultimately, it is up



                                                                                                  26
                                               Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                     Frequently Asked Questions




   to the candidate to have reliable transportation, as they may have urban, suburban, and/or
   rural placements that are not easily accessed by public transportation.

5. Will I begin teaching right away?

   While candidates are expected to be active participants in the classroom during all parts
   of their clinical experiences, they generally are not expected to start teaching right away.
   Our model is based on the graduated release of responsibility over a calendar year from:
   (1) observing and assisting; to (2) working with small groups, individual students, or
   whole groups in limited support, teaching, or co-teaching capacities; to (3) assuming
   primary responsibility for one or multiple course preparations. During the conversation
   with your School-Based Teacher Educator where you review responsibilities and
   requirements to include in your letter of expectations, you should cover in detail what is
   expected of you in terms of these responsibilities and their timeframes.

6. Can I work flexibly with multiple School-Based Teacher Educators in the same school?

   No. All placements are arranged at the district level, and School-Based Teacher
   Educators are contracted to provide particular kinds of support and conduct specific
   modes of assessment and evaluation throughout the placement. If you encounter any
   difficulties in working with a School-Based Teacher Educator during your clinical
   placement, contact your program faculty and the Senior Internship Program Specialist
   for support.




                                                                                                  27
                                                          Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                                     Letter of Expectations




Letter of Expectations

Letter of Expectations: Specific Requirements

 The Letter of Expectations is designed to ensure that all parties’ needs and expectations are
 met during field experiences and student teaching. The Letter of Expectations is written by
 the candidate and approved by the university faculty. Please be sure to include all sections
 outlined below, answering the questions under each heading. Inclusion candidates must
 consider both their content area and inclusion program expectations when completing the
 Letter of Expectations.


I.        General Expectations: What do the School-Based Teacher Educator(s) and the
           candidate expect to occur during the field experience and/or student teaching
           experience?

II.       Specific Requirements: In as detailed language as possible, explain the duties of each
           participant in the field experience and/or student teaching experience.
          A. Candidate: What will the candidate do in terms of observation, lesson planning,
               teaching, evaluation and assessment, parent contact, administrative contact,
               working with other teachers (or candidates), one-on-one student instruction,
               administrative duties, after school duties, et cetera?
          B. School-Based Teacher Educator(s): What will the School-Based Teacher
               Educator(s) do in terms of observation, assisting with unit and lesson planning,
               modeling teaching, critiquing and advising, and acting as a liaison between the
               candidate and other teachers, administrators, and parents, et cetera?
          C. University-Based Teacher Educator: The University-Based Teacher Educator
               will be available to the candidate and the School-Based Teacher Educator to
               facilitate the field experience and student teaching processes. Explain when and
               how often the University-Based Teacher Educator will meet with the School-
               Based Teacher Educator and candidate to provide professional support, observe
               the candidate, and discuss the candidate’s progress.

III.      Schedule:
          A. What time is the candidate expected to arrive? Until what time is the candidate
              expected to stay?
          B. Specific commitments for the student teaching experience3:
               1. When will the candidate begin to assume partial or full responsibility for
                  teaching duties?
 3
     Experiences required for the field experience will be identified in the concurrent seminar.


                                                                                                      28
                                             Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                        Letter of Expectations




          2. Which classes will the candidate co-teach with the School-Based Teacher
             Educator?
          3. Which classes will the candidate observe?
          4. In which week of the field experience will the candidate teach a series of
             lessons, and how will the candidate transition from less to more instructional
             responsibility?
      C. Include a timeline of responsibilities over the course of the placement.

IV.   Lesson Plans: How often and when will the candidate review their lesson plans with the
       School-Based Teacher Educator(s), and what will happen during those reviews?

V.    Meetings:
      A. How often will the candidate and School-Based Teacher Educator(s) meet?
         When will these meetings take place? What will be the focus of these meetings
         (review lesson plans, problem solve, critique, advise, et cetera)?
      B. Will the candidate and School-Based Teacher Educator(s) be able to meet at
         other times if the need arises? How will these meetings be arranged?
      C. The candidate, School-Based Teacher Educator(s), and University-Based
         Teacher Educator will meet as soon as possible after each observation by the
         University-Based Teacher Educator.

VI.   Observations:
      A. When will the School-Based Teacher Educator(s) observe the candidate (e.g.,
         before the University-Based Teacher Educator/faculty come to observe)?
      B. When will the University-Based Teacher Educator observe the candidate
         teaching lessons during the field experience or student teaching?

VII. Possible Situations:
     A. What will the candidate do if the School-Based Teacher Educator(s) is absent? *
     B. What will the School-Based Teacher Educator(s) do if the candidate is absent?
     C. How will each party inform the other of absences?
     D. What will be done in case of snow days or emergencies?

       *Note: Candidates are not legally allowed to substitute for School-Based Teacher
           Educators during their clinical experiences.




                                                                                              29
                                               Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                            Cover Letter for Letter of Expectations




                        COVER LETTER FOR LETTER OF EXPECTATIONS

Candidate name:

Candidate phone number:

Candidate email:

School-Based Teacher Educator name:

School-Based Teacher Educator phone number:

School-Based Teacher Educator email address:

Inclusion School-Based Teacher Educator name:

Inclusion School-Based Teacher Educator phone:

Inclusion School-Based Teacher Educator email:

School name and address:



School telephone number:

University-Based Teacher Educator name:

University-Based Teacher Educator phone number:

University-Based Teacher Educator email:

PLEASE FILL OUT ALL PARTS OF THIS FORM!

 All parties have read and agree with the objectives and requirements outlined in this Letter of
 Expectations and have read the entire Student Teaching Handbook.

Candidate:                                                         Date:

School-Based Teacher Educator:                                     Date:

Inclusion School-Based Teacher Educator:                           Date:

University-Based Teacher Educator:                                 Date:

Inclusion University-Based Teacher Educator:                       Date:


                                                                                              30
                                                Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                                Absence Report




                                    Absence Report
Any full or partial absences that result in the candidate not fulfilling the required number of days
in the placement must be made up with additional time. Please complete and submit the
following form to program faculty and the Senior Internship Program Specialist for all absences.


Candidate name:

Date/s of absence:                   Date of return:

Reason for absence:




Candidate signature:                                       Date:

School-Based Teacher Educator signature:



 Submit a copy of this form to the Senior Internship Program Specialist and to the
 Warner faculty responsible for your program.




                                                                                                31
                                               Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                              Legal Aspects of Student Teaching




                  Legal Aspects Of Student Teaching

Graduate students at the Warner School are expected to become familiar with the information
provided in the University of Rochester’s Regulations and University Policies Concerning
Graduate Studies (often referred to as the “Red Book”), which is available online at the
University of Rochester website (http://www.rochester.edu/GradBulletin/). It is important
that student teachers also adhere to federal, state, and local laws, as well as policies at the
placement site. This section of the handbook is intended to be an abridged guide to NYS
laws that apply to student teaching placement and what your legal obligations are in
terms of reporting child abuse or maltreatment.

Financial protection
As explained in more detail below, student teachers, which NYS law refers to as a practice,
cadet, or pre-service teacher, are financially protected from claims of wrongdoing provided
that the student teacher was acting within the scope of their responsibilities at the time of
the incident.

   New York State Education Law Section 3023

   § 3023. Liability of a board of education, trustee, trustees or board of cooperative
   educational services. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, general,
   special or local, or the limitation contained in the provisions of any city charter, it shall
   be the duty of each board of education, trustee or trustees, in any school district having
   a population of less than one million, and each board of cooperative educational
   services established pursuant to section nineteen hundred fifty of this chapter, to save
   harmless and protect all teachers, practice or cadet teachers, authorized participants in a
   school volunteer program, and members of University-Based Teacher Educatory and
   administrative staff or employees from financial loss arising out of any claim, demand,
   suit or judgment by reason of alleged negligence or other act resulting in accidental
   bodily injury to any person, or accidental damage to the property of any person within
   or without the school building, provided such teacher, practice or cadet teacher,
   authorized participant in a school volunteer program, or member of the University-
   Based Teacher Educatory or administrative staff or employee at the time of the
   accident or injury was acting in the discharge of his duties within the scope of his
   employment or authorized volunteer duties and/or under the direction of said board of
   education, trustee, trustees or board of cooperative educational services; and said board
   of education, trustee, trustees or board of cooperative educational services may arrange
   for and maintain appropriate insurance with any insurance company created by or
   under the laws of this state, or in any insurance company authorized by law to transact
   business in this state, or such board, trustee, trustees or board of cooperative


                                                                                                   32
                                              Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                             Legal Aspects of Student Teaching




   educational services may elect to act as self-insurers to maintain the aforesaid
   protection. A board of education, trustee, board of trustees, or board of
   cooperative educational services, however, shall not be subject to the duty imposed by
   this section, unless such teacher, practice or cadet teacher, authorized participant in a
   school volunteer program, or member of the University-Based Teacher Educator and
   administrative staff or employee shall, within ten days of the time he is served with any
   summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading, deliver the original or a
   copy of the same to such board of education, trustee, board of trustees, or board of
   cooperative educational services.

Safety and reporting obligations
A student teacher is considered to be a “mandated reporter” under New York State Social
Service Law. Mandated reporters are required to report instances of suspected child abuse
or maltreatment to the New York State Office of Children and Family Services (OCFS)
when they are presented in their professional roles with reasonable cause to suspect child
abuse or maltreatment.

If a student teacher suspects that a child is being or has been abused—by a family
member, acquaintance, school staff, or stranger—the student teacher must adhere to the
following procedure:
    1) File an oral report immediately to the Mandated Reporter Line at 1-800-635-1522.
    2) Report your suspicions to the school principal and make a statement in writing
        about what was seen/heard. This must be done within 24 hours of the occurrence.
    3) Call your advisor and University-Based Teacher Educator to report your suspicions
        to the university. Regardless of what your school decides to do, a university faculty
        member must be informed so that we can make a responsible decision ourselves
        given you and your involvement. This must be done within one hour of the
        occurrence.
    4) File a signed, written report (LDSS-2221A Report of Suspected Child Abuse or
        Maltreatment) within 48 hours of the initial oral report. Written reports are
        submitted to the County Department of Social Services (DSS) where the
        abused/maltreated child resides. For students that are residents of Monroe
        County, submit the original, signed form to: Monroe County DSS;
        111 Westfall Road; Rochester, NY 14620-4686. For students who reside in another
        county, please visit http://www.ocfs.state.ny.us/main/localdss.asp to obtain the
        address of the local DSS office.

For clarification on the definition and signs of child abuse and maltreatment, as well as
other useful information on this topic, student teachers can consult
http://www.ocfs.state.ny.us/main/ and can also check with their university advisor.



                                                                                                33
                                          Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                         Legal Aspects of Student Teaching




New York State Social Services Law Section 413

§ 413. Persons and officials required to report cases of suspected child abuse or
maltreatment. 1. (a) The following persons and officials are required to report or cause
a report to be made in accordance with this title when they have reasonable cause to
suspect that a child coming before them in their professional or official capacity is an
abused or maltreated child, or when they have reasonable cause to suspect that a child
is an abused or maltreated child where the parent, guardian, custodian or other person
legally responsible for such child comes before them in their professional or official
capacity and states from personal knowledge facts, conditions or circumstances which,
if correct, would render the child an abused or maltreated child: any physician;
registered physician assistant; surgeon; medical examiner; coroner; dentist; dental
hygienist; osteopath; optometrist; chiropractor; podiatrist; resident; intern;
psychologist; registered nurse; social worker; emergency medical technician; licensed
creative arts therapist; licensed marriage and family therapist; licensed mental health
counselor; licensed psychoanalyst; hospital personnel engaged in the admission,
examination, care or treatment of persons; a Christian Science practitioner; school
official, which includes but is not limited to school teacher, school guidance counselor,
school psychologist, school social worker, school nurse, school administrator or other
school personnel required to hold a teaching or administrative license or certificate;
social services worker; director of a children's overnight camp, summer day camp or
traveling summer day camp, as such camps are defined in section thirteen hundred
ninety-two of the public health law; day care center worker; school-age child care
worker; provider of family or group family day care; employee or volunteer in a
residential care facility defined in subdivision four of section four hundred twelvea of
this title or any other child care or foster care worker; mental health professional;
substance abuse counselor; alcoholism counselor; all persons credentialed by the
office of alcoholism and substance abuse services; peace officer; police officer; district
attorney or assistant district attorney; investigator employed in the office of a district
attorney; or other law enforcement official. (b) Whenever such person is required to
report under this title in his or her capacity as a member of the staff of a medical or
other public or private institution, school, facility or agency, he or she shall make the
report as required by this title and immediately notify the person in charge of such
institution, school, facility or agency, or his or her designated agent. Such person in
charge, or the designated agent of such person, shall be responsible for all
subsequent administration necessitated by the report. Any report shall include the
name, title and contact information for every staff person of the institution who is
believed to have direct knowledge of the allegations in the report. Nothing in this
section or title is intended to require more than one report from any such institution,
school or agency. (c) A medical or other public or private institution, school,
facility or agency shall not take any retaliatory personnel action, as such term is


                                                                                             34
                                           Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                          Legal Aspects of Student Teaching




defined in paragraph (e) of subdivision one of section seven hundred forty of the labor
law, against an employee because such employee believes that he or she has reasonable
cause to suspect that a child is an abused or maltreated child and that employee
therefore makes a report in accordance with this title. No school, school official,
child care provider, foster care provider, residential care facility provider, hospital,
medical institution provider or mental health facility provider shall impose any
conditions, including prior approval or prior notification, upon a member of their staff
specifically required to report under this title. At the time of the making of a report, or
at any time thereafter, such person or official may exercise the right to request,
pursuant to paragraph (A) of subdivision four of section four hundred twenty-two of
this title, the findings of an investigation made pursuant to this title or section 45.07 of
the mental hygiene law.

(d) Social services workers are required to report or cause a report to be made in
accordance with this title when they have reasonable cause to suspect that a child is an
abused or maltreated child where a person comes before them in their professional or
official capacity and states from personal knowledge facts, conditions or circumstances
which, if correct, would render the child an abused or maltreated child.
1.        Any person, institution, school, facility, agency, organization, partnership or
corporation which employs persons mandated to report suspected incidents of child
abuse or maltreatment pursuant to subdivision one of this section shall provide
consistent with section four hundred twenty-one of this chapter, all such current and
new employees with written information explaining the reporting requirements set out
in subdivision one of this section and in sections four hundred fifteen through four
hundred twenty of this title. The employers shall be responsible for the costs associated
with printing and distributing the written information.
2.        Any state or local governmental agency or authorized agency which issues a
license, certificate or permit to an individual to operate a family day care home or
group family day care home shall provide each person currently holding or seeking
such a license, certificate or permit with written information explaining the reporting
requirements set out in subdivision one of this section and in sections four hundred
fifteen through four hundred twenty of this title.
3.        Any person, institution, school, facility, agency, organization, partnership or
corporation, which employs persons who are mandated to report suspected
incidents of child abuse or maltreatment pursuant to subdivision one of this
section and whose employees, in the normal course of their employment, travel to
locations where children reside, shall provide, consistent with section four hundred
twenty-one of this title, all such current and new employees with information on
recognizing the signs of an unlawful methamphetamine laboratory. Pursuant to section




                                                                                               35
                                              Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                             Legal Aspects of Student Teaching




   19.27 of the mental hygiene law, the office of alcoholism and substance abuse services
   shall make available to such employers information on recognizing the signs of
   unlawful methamphetamine laboratories.


Immunity from liability
When a student teacher, as a mandated reporter, makes a report of child abuse or
maltreatment, it is reasonable to assume that he or she has acted within the scope of their
student teacher role and has immunity from any civil or criminal liability, except if the
report is an act of willful misconduct or gross negligence.

  New York State Social Services Law Section 419
  § 419. Immunity from liability. Any person, official, or institution participating in
  good faith in the providing of a service pursuant to section four hundred twenty-four of
  this title, the making of a report, the taking of photographs, the removal or keeping of a
  child pursuant to this title, or the disclosure of child protective services information in
  compliance with sections twenty, four hundred twenty-two and four hundred twenty-
  two-a of this chapter shall have immunity from any liability, civil or criminal, that might
  otherwise result by reason of such actions. For the purpose of any proceeding, civil or
  criminal, the good faith of any such person, official, or institution required to report
  cases of child abuse or maltreatment or providing a service pursuant to section four
  hundred twenty-four or the disclosure of child protective services information in
  compliance with sections twenty, four hundred twenty-two and four hundred twenty-
  two-a of this chapter shall be presumed, provided such person, official or institution was
  acting in discharge of their duties and within the scope of their employment, and that
  such liability did not result from the willful misconduct or gross negligence of such
  person, official or institution.

Penalties for failure to report
Failure to report suspected abuse or neglect could result in the mandated reporter being
convicted of a crime and/or being personally liable to the victim.

   New York State Social Services Law Section 420
   § 420. Penalties for failure to report. 1. Any person, official or institution required by
   this title to report a case of suspected child abuse or maltreatment who willfully
   fails to do so shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor.
   2. Any person, official or institution required by this title to report a case of suspected
   child abuse or maltreatment who knowingly and willfully fails to do so shall be civilly
   liable for the damages proximately caused by such failure.




                                                                                                 36
                                               Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                        Directory of Field University-Based Teacher
                                                                                          Educators




                         Physical Restraint Of Students
The safety of students is ultimately the responsibility of the School-Based Teacher Educator.
Candidates are responsible for gaining an understanding of school and classroom discipline
policies, but are never allowed to restrain (to hold back using physical force) a student; this can
only be done by someone who has completed the necessary training. Candidates are not to
participate in physical restraint of students under any circumstance. Candidates are required to
provide appropriate assistance in the maintenance of a safe learning environment through the use
of techniques such as verbal de-escalation or getting help from appropriate school staff. The
School-Based Teacher Educator should proactively develop a plan that will allow the candidate
to appropriately provide support to the classroom when physical restraint procedures are deemed
necessary. If the candidate chooses to ignore these clear directives, such actions may be cause for
review of their status in the university program and/or discipline, which may include separation
from the program.




                                                                                              37
                                              Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                                                                    Directory of Field Supervisors




   2025-2026 Program Faculty and Supervisor (UBTE) Directory
Department Leadership
Director of Teacher       Kevin Meuwissen         585-273-5940      kmeuwissen@warner.rochester.edu
Education; Teaching and
Curriculum Depart. Chair
Student Internship        Anna Rynski             585-274-2818      arynski@warner.rochester.edu
Program Specialist
Early Childhood and Childhood Education
Faculty                     Kristen Love          585-690-8353     klove@warner.rochester.edu
                                                  585-273-5443
Supervisors                 Maryrita (MR) Maier   585-733-0622     mmaier2@u.rochester.edu
Inclusive Education
Faculty                     Martha Mock           585-276-3363     mmock@warner.rochester.edu
                                                  585-766-7374
Supervisor                  Sue Maddamma          585-208-1514
English Language Arts, Secondary
Faculty                     Valerie Marsh         585-820-0173     vmarsh@warner.rochester.edu
Supervisor                  Rhiannon White        585-957-4883     rhiannon.white@warner.rochester.edu
Mathematics, Secondary
Faculty                     Jeffrey Choppin       585-273-4913     jchoppin@warner.rochester.edu

Faculty and Supervisor      Zenon Borys           585-259-9598     zborys@warner.rochester.edu
Science, Secondary
Faculty                  April Luehmann           585-755-9786     aluehmann@warner.rochester.edu
Supervisor               Molly Wilson             201-899-9102     ewilson@warner.rochester.edu
Computer Science, Secondary
Faculty and Supervisor   Zenon Borys              585-259-9598     zborys@warner.rochester.edu
Social Studies, Secondary
Faculty                  Kevin Meuwissen      585-273-5940    kmeuwissen@warner.rochester.edu
Supervisor             Rhiannon White         585-957-4883     rhiannon.white@warner.rochester.edu
Reading and Literacies
Faculty              Carol St. George         585-275-0967     cstgeorge@warner.rochester.edu
Supervisor           Kathleen Spitz           585-613-6170     kathleen.spitz@warner.rochester.edu
TESOL and Languages Other Than English
Faculty                  Meagan Driver                         mdriver@warner.rochester.edu
Supervisor               Mary R. Watts        585-301-2477     mary.watts@warner.rochester.edu




                                                                                             38
Field Experience and Student Teaching Handbook
                      Directory of Field Supervisors




                                               39
